Love is a Sad Song
I sit against this grey rock, beneath a sky of pristine blueness, and think of you, Sushila. It is
November, and the grass is turning brown and yellow. Crushed, it still smells sweet. The afternoon
sun shimmers on the oak leaves and turns them a glittering silver. A cricket sizzles its way through the
long grass. The stream murmurs at the bottom of the hill — that stream where you and I lingered on a
golden afternoon in May.
I sit here and think of you, and try to see your slim brown hand resting against this rock, feeling its
warmth. I am aware again of the texture of your skin, the coolness of your feet, the sharp tingle of your
finger-tips. And in the pastures of my mind I run my hand through your quivering mouth, and crush
your tender breasts. Remembered passion grows sweeter with the passing of time.
You will not be thinking of me now, as you sit in your home in the city, cooking or sewing or trying
to study for examinations. There will be men and women and children circling about you, in that
crowded house of your grandmother’s, and you will not be able to think of me for more than a moment
or two. But I know you do think of me sometimes, in some private moment which cuts you off from the
crowd. You will remember how I will probably wonder what it is all about, this loving, and why it
should cause such an upheaval. You are still a child, Sushila — and yet you found it so easy to quieten
my impatient heart.
On the night you came to stay with us, the light from the street lamp shone through the branches of
the peach tree and made leaf-patterns on the walls. Through the glass panes of the front door I caught
a glimpse of little Sunil’s face, bright and questing, and then — a hand — a dark, long-fingered hand
that could only have belonged to you.
It was almost a year since I had seen you, my dark and slender girl. And now you were in your
sixteenth year. And Sunil was twelve; and your uncle, Dinesh, who lived with me, was twenty-three.
And I was almost thirty — a fearful and wonderful age, when life becomes dangerous for dreamers.
I remember that when I left Delhi last year, you cried. At first I thought it was because I was going
away; then I realised that it was because you could not go anywhere yourself. Did you envy my
freedom — the freedom to live in a poverty of my own choosing, the freedom of the writer? Sunil, to
my surprise, did not show much emotion at my going away. This hurt me a little, because during that
year he had been particularly close to me, and I felt for him a very special love. But separations
cannot be of any significance to small boys of twelve who live for today, tomorrow, and — if they are
very serious — the day after.
Before I went away with Dinesh, you made us garlands of marigolds. They were orange and gold,
fresh and clean and kissed by the sun. You garlanded me as I sat talking to Sunil. I remember you both
as you looked that day — Sunil’s smile dimpling his cheeks, while you gazed at me very seriously,
your expression very tender. I loved you even then …
Our first picnic.
The path to the little stream took us through oak forest, where the flashy Blue Magpies played
follow-my-leader with their harsh, creaky calls. Skirting an open ridge (the place where I now sit and
write), the path dipped through oak, rhododendron and maple, until it reached a little knoll above the
stream. It was a spot unknown to the tourists and summer visitors. Sometimes a milkman or woodcutter crossed the stream on the way to town or village; but no one lived beside it. Wild roses grew
on the banks.
I do not remember much of that picnic. There was a lot of dull conversation with our neighbours,
the Kapoors, who had come along too. You and Sunil were rather bored. Dinesh looked preoccupied:
he was fed up with college; he wanted to start earning a living; wanted to paint. His restlessness often
made him moody, irritable.
Near the knoll the stream was too shallow for bathing, but I told Sunil about a cave and a pool
further downstream, and promised that we would visit the pool another day.
That same night, after dinner, we took a walk along the dark road that goes past the house and leads
to the burning-ghat. Sunil, who had already sensed the intimacy between us, took my hand put it in
yours. An odd, touching little gesture!
‘Tell us a story,’ you said.
‘Yes, tell us,’said Sunil.
I told you the story of the pure in heart. A shepherd boy found a snake in the forest, and the snake
told the boy that it was really a princess who had been bewitched and turned into a snake, and that it
could only recover its human form if someone who was truly pure in heart gave it three kisses on the
mouth. The boy put his lips to the mouth of the snake and kissed it thrice. And the snake was
transformed into a beautiful princess. But the boy lay cold and dead.
‘You always tell sad stories,’ complained Sunil.
‘I like sad stories,’ you said. ‘Tell us another.’
‘Tomorrow night. I’m sleepy.’
We were woken in the night by a strong wind, which went whistling round the old house and came
rushing down the chimney, humming and hawing and finally choking itself.
Sunil woke up and cried out, ‘What’s that noise, uncle?’
‘Only the wind,’ I said.
‘Not a ghost?’
‘Well, perhaps the wind is made up of ghosts. Perhaps this wind contains the ghosts of all the
people who have lived and died in this old house and want to come in again from the cold.’
You told me about a boy who had been fond of you in Delhi. Apparently he had visited the house on
a few occasions, and had sometimes met you on the street while you were on your way home from
school. At first, he had been fond of another girl but later he switched his affections to you. When you
told me that he had written to you recently, and that, before coming up, you had replied to his letter, I
was consumed by jealousy — an emotion which I thought I had grown out of long ago. It did not help
to be told that you were not serious about the boy, that you were sorry for him because he had already
been disappointed in love.
‘If you feel sorry for everyone who has been disappointed in love,’ I said, ‘you will soon be
receiving the affections of every young man over ten.’
‘Let them give me their affections,’ you said, ‘and I will give them my chappal over their heads.’
‘But spare my head,’ I said.
‘Have you been in love before?’
‘Many times. But this is the first time.’
‘And who is your love?’
‘Haven’t you guessed?’
Sunil, who was following our conversation with deep interest, seemed to revel in the situation.
Probably he fancied himself playing the part of Cupid, or Kamadeva, and delighted in watching the
arrows of love strike home. No doubt I made it more enjoyable for him, because I could not hide my
feelings. Soon Dinesh would know, too — and then?
A year ago my feelings about you were almost paternal! Or so I thought … But you are no longer a
child; and I am a little older too. For when, the night after the picnic, you took my hand and held it
against your soft warm cheek, it was the first time that a girl had responded to me so readily, so
tenderly. Perhaps it was just innocence; but that one action of yours, that acceptance of me,
immediately devastated my heart.
Gently, fervently, I kissed your eyes and forehead, your small round mouth, and the lobes of your
ears, and your long smooth throat; and I whispered, ‘Sushila, I love you, I love you, I love you,’ in the
same way that millions and millions of love-smitten young men have whispered since time
immemorial. What else can one say? I love you, I love you. There is nothing simpler; nothing that can
be made to mean anymore than that. And what else did I say? That I would look after you and work
for you and make you happy; and that too had been said before, and I was in no way different from
anyone. I was a man, and yet I was a boy again.
We visited the stream again, a day or two later, early in the morning. Using the rocks as steppingstones, we wandered downstream for about a furlong until we reached a pool and a small waterfall
and a cool dark cave. The rocks were mostly grey but some were yellow with age and some were
cushioned with moss. A forktail stood on a boulder in the middle of the stream, uttering its low
pleasant call. Water came dripping down from the sides of the cave, while sunlight filtered through a
crevice in the rock-ceiling, dappling your face. A spray of water was caught by a shaft of sunlight,
and at intervals it reflected the colours of the rainbow.
‘It is a beautiful place,’ you said.
‘Come, then,’ I said, ‘Let us bathe.’
Sunil and I removed our clothes and jumped into the pool, while you sat down in the shade of a
walnut tree and watched us disport ourselves in the water. Like a frog, Sunil leapt and twisted about
in the clear, icy water; his eyes shone, his teeth glistened white, his body glowed with sunshine,
youth, and the jewels made by drops of water glistening in the sun.
Then we stretched ourselves out beside you, and allowed the sun to sink deep into our bodies.
Your feet, laved with dew, stood firm on the quickening grass. There was a butterfly between us:
red and gold its wings and heavy with dew. It could not move because of the weight of moisture. And
as your foot came nearer and I saw that you would crush it, I said, ‘Wait. Don’t crush the butterfly,
Sushila. It has only a few days in the sun, and we have many.’
‘And if I spare it,’ you said, laughing, ‘what will you do for me, what will you pay?’
‘Why, anything you say.’
‘And will you kiss my foot?’
‘Both feet,’ I said; and did so willingly. For they were no less than the wings of butterflies.
Later, when you ventured near the water, I dragged you in with me. You cried out, not in alarm but
with the shock of the cold water, and then, wrenching yourself from my arms, clambered on to the
rocks, your thin dress clinging to your thighs, your feet making long patterns on the smooth stone.
Though we tired ourselves out that day, we did not sleep at night. We lay together, you and Sunil on
either side of me. Your head rested on my shoulders, your hair lay pressed against my cheek. Sunil
had curled himself up into a ball; but he was far from being asleep. He took my hand, and he took
yours, and he placed them together. And I kissed the tender inside of your hand.
I whispered to you, ‘Sushila, there has never been anyone I’ve loved so much. I’ve been waiting all
these years to find you. For a long time I did not even like women. But you are so different. You care
for me, don’t you?’
You nodded in the darkness. I could see the outline of your face in the faint moonlight that filtered
through the skylight. You never replied directly to a question. I suppose that was feminine quality;
coyness, perhaps.
‘Do you love me, Sushila?’
No answer.
‘Not now. When you are a little older. In a year or two.’
Did she nod in the darkness, or did I imagine it?
‘I know it’s too early,’ I continued. ‘You are still too young, you are still at school. But already you
are much wiser than me. I am finding too difficult to control myself, but I will, since you wish it so.
I’m very impatient, I know that, but I’ll wait for as long as you make me — two or three or a hundred
years. Yes, Sushila, a hundred years!’
Ah, what a pretty speech I made! Romeo could have used some of it; Majnu, too.
And your answer? Just a nod; a little pressure on my hand.
I took your fingers and kissed them one by one. Long fingers, as long as mine.
After some time I became aware of Sunil nudging me.
‘You are not talking to me,’ he complained. ‘You are only talking to her. You only love her.’
‘I’m terribly sorry. I love you too, Sunil.’
Content with this assurance, he fell asleep; but towards morning, thinking himself in the middle of
the bed, he rolled over and landed with a thump on the floor. He didn’t know how it had happened,
and accused me of pushing him out.
‘I know you don’t want me in the bed,’ he said.
It was a good thing, Dinesh, in the next room, didn’t wake up.
‘Have you done any work this week?’ asked Dinesh with a look of reproach.
‘Not much,’ I said.
‘You are hardly ever in the house. You are never at your desk. Something seems to have happened
to you.’
‘I have given myself a holiday, that’s all. Can’t writers take holidays too?’
‘No. You have said so yourself. And anyway, you seem to have taken a permanent holiday.’
‘Have you finished that painting of the Tibetan woman?’ I asked, trying to change the subject.
‘That’s the third time you’ve asked me that question, even though you saw the completed painting a
week ago. You’re getting very absent-minded.’
There was a letter from your old boy friend; I mean your young boy friend. It was addressed to
Sunil, but I recognised the sender’s name and knew it was really for you.
I assumed a look of calm detachment and handed the letter to you; but both you and Sunil sensed my
dismay. At first you teased me, and showed me the boy’s photograph, which had been enclosed (he
was certainly good-looking in a flashy way); then, finding that I became gloomier every minute, you
tried to make amends, assuring me that the correspondence was one-sided and that you no longer
replied to his letters.
And that night, to show me that you really cared, you gave me your hand as soon as the lights were
out. Sunil was fast asleep.
We sat together at the foot of your bed. I kept my arm about you, while you rested your head against
my chest. Your feet lay in repose upon mine. I kept kissing you. And when we lay down together, I
loosened your blouse, and kissed your small firm breasts, and put my lips to your nipples and felt
them grow hard against my mouth.
The shy responsiveness of your kisses soon turned to passion. You clung to me. We had forgotten
time and place and circumstance. The light of your eyes had been drowned in that lost look of a
woman who desires. For a space we both struggled against desire. Suddenly I had become afraid of
myself — afraid for you. I tried to free myself from your clasping arms. But you cried in a low voice:
‘Love me! Love me! I want you to love me.’
Another night you fell asleep with your face in the crook of my arm, and I lay awake a long time,
conscious of your breathing, of the touch of your hair on my cheek, of the soft warm soles of your feet,
of your slim waist and legs.
And in the morning, when the sunshine filled the room, I watched you while you slept — your slim
body in repose, your face tranquil, your thin dark hands like sleeping butterflies; and then, when you
woke, the beautiful untidiness of your hair and the drowsiness in your eyes. You lay folded up like a
kitten, your limbs as untouched by self-consciousness as the limbs of a young and growing tree. And
during the warmth of the day a bead of sweat rested on your brow like a small pearl.
I tried to remember what you looked like as a child. Even then, I had always been aware of your
presence. You must have been nine or ten when I first saw you — thin, dark, plain-faced, always
wearing the faded green skirt that was your school uniform. You went about barefoot. Once, when the
monsoon arrived, you ran out into the rain with the other children, naked, exulting in the swish of the
cool rain. I remembered your beautiful straight legs and thighs, your swift smile, your dark eyes. You
say you do not remember playing naked in the rain; but that is because you did not see yourself.
I did not notice you growing. Your face did not change very much. You must have been thirteen
when you gave up skirts and started wearing the salwar-kameez. You had few clothes; but the
plainness of your dress only seemed to bring out your own radiance. And as you grew older, your
eyes became more expressive, your hair longer and glossier, your gestures more graceful; and then,
when you came to me in the hills, I found that you had been transformed into a fairy princess of
devastating charm.
We were idling away the afternoon on our beds, and you were reclining in my arms, when Dinesh
came in unexpectedly. He said nothing, merely passed through the room and entered his studio. Sunil
got a fright, and you were momentarily confused. Then you said, ‘He knows already,’ and I said, ‘Yes,
he must know.’
Later I spoke to Dinesh. I told him that I wanted to marry; that I knew I would have to wait until you
were older and had finished school — probably two or three years — and that I was prepared to wait
although I knew it would be a long and difficult business. I asked him to help me.
He was upset at first, probably because he felt I had been deceptive (which was true), and also
because of his own responsibility in the matter. You were his niece, and I had made love to you while
he had been preoccupied with other things. But after a little while, when he saw that I was sincere
and rather confused, he relented.
‘It has happened too soon,’ he said. ‘She is too young for all this. Have you told her that you love
her?’
‘Of course. Many times.’
‘You’re a fool, then. Have you told her that you want to marry her?’
‘Yes.’
‘Fool again. That’s not the way it is done. Haven’t you lived in India long enough to know that?’
‘But I love her.’
‘Does she love you?’
‘I think so.’
‘You think so. Desire isn’t love, you must know that. Still, I suppose she does love you, otherwise
she would not be holding hands with you all day. But you are quite mad, falling in love with a girl
half your age.’
‘Well, I’m not exactly an old man. I’m thirty.’
‘And she’s a schoolgirl.’
‘She isn’t a girl any more, she’s too responsive.’
‘Oh, you’ve found that out, have you?’
‘Well …’ I said, covered in confusion.
‘Well, she has shown that she cares a little. You know that it’s years since I took any interest in a
girl. You called it unnatural on my part, remember? Well, they simply did not exist for me, that’s true.’
‘Delayed adolescence,’ muttered Dinesh.
‘But Sushila is different. She puts me at ease. She doesn’t turn away from me. I love her and I want
to look after her. I can only do that by marrying her.’
‘All right, but take it easy. Don’t get carried away. And don’t, for God’s sake, give her a baby. Not
while she’s still at school! I will do what I can to help you. But you will have to be patient. And no
one else must know of this, or I will be blamed for everything. As it is, Sunil knows too much, and
he’s too small to know so much.’
‘Oh, he won’t tell anyone.’
‘I wish you had fallen in love with her two years from now. You will have to wait that long,
anyway. Getting married isn’t simple matter. People will wonder why we are in such a hurry,
marrying her off as soon as she leaves school. They’ll think the worst!’
‘Well, people do marry for love, you know, even in India. It’s happening all the time.’
‘But it doesn’t happen in our family. You know how orthodox most of them are. They wouldn’t
appreciate your outlook. You may marry Sushila for love, but it will have to look like an arranged
marriage!’
Little things went wrong that evening.
First, a youth on the road passed a remark which you resented; and you, most unlady-like, but most
Punjabi-like, picked up a stone and threw it at him. It struck him on the leg. He was too surprised to
say anything, and limped off. I remonstrated with you; told you that throwing stones at people often
resulted in a fight; then realised that you had probably wanted to see me fighting on your behalf.
Later you were annoyed because I said you were a little absentminded. Then Sunil sulked because I
spoke roughly to him (I can’t remember why), and refused to talk to me for three hours, which was a
record. I kept apologising but neither of you would listen. It was all part of a game. When I gave up
trying, and turned instead to my typewriter and my unfinished story, you came and sat beside me and
started playing with my hair. You were jealous of my story, of the fact that it was possible for me to
withdraw into my work. And I reflected that a woman had to be jealous of something. If there wasn’t
another woman, then it was a man’s work, or his hobby, or his best friend, or his favourite sweater, or
his pet mongoose, that made her resentful. There is a story in Kipling about a woman who grew
insanely jealous of a horse’s saddle, because her husband spent an hour every day polishing it with
great care and loving kindness.
Would it be like that in marriage, I wondered — an eternal triangle: you, me and the typewriter?
But there were only a few days left before you returned to the plains, so I gladly pushed away the
typewriter and took you in my arms instead. After all, once you had gone away, it would be a long
long time before I could hold you in my arms again. I might visit you in Delhi, but we would not be
able to enjoy the same freedom and intimacy. And while I savoured the salt kiss of your lips, I
wondered how long I would have to wait until I could really call you my own.
Dinesh was at college, and Sunil had gone roller-skating, and we were alone all morning. At first
you avoided me; so I picked up a book and pretended to read; and barely five minutes had passed
before you stole up from behind and snapped the book shut.
‘It is a warm day,’ you said. ‘Let us go down to the stream.’
Alone together for the first time, we took the steep path down to the stream, and there, hand in hand,
scrambled over the rocks until we reached the pool and the waterfall.
‘I will bathe today,’ you said; and in a few moments you stood beside me, naked, caressed by
sunlight and a soft breeze coming down the valley. I put my hand out to share in the sun’s caress, but
you darted away, laughing, and ran to the waterfall as though you would hide behind a curtain of
gushing water. I was soon beside you. I took you in my arms, and kissed you, while the water crashed
down upon our heads. Who yielded — you or I? All I remember is that you had entwined yourself
about me like a clinging vine, and that a little later we lay together on the grass, on bruised and
broken clover, while a whistling-thrush released its deep sweet secret on the trembling air.
Blackbird on the wing, bird of the forest shadows, black rose in the long ago of summer, this was
your song: it isn’t time that’s passing by, it is you and I.
It was your last night under my roof. We were not alone; but when I woke in the middle of the night
and stretched my hand out, across the space between our beds, you took my hand, for you were awake
too. Then I pressed the ends of your fingers, one by one, as I had done so often before, and you dug
your nails into my flesh. And as our hands made love, much as our bodies might have done. They
clung together, warmed and caressed each other, each finger taking on an identity of its own and
seeking its opposite. Sometimes the tips of our fingers merely brushed against each other, teasingly,
and sometimes our palms met with a rush, would tremble and embrace, separate, and then
passionately seek each other out. And when sleep finally overcame you, your hand fell listlessly
between our beds, touching the ground; and I lifted it up, and after putting it once to my lips, returned
it gently to your softly rising bosom.
And so you went away, all three of you, and I was left alone with the brooding mountains. If I could
not pass a few weeks without you, how was I to pass a year, two years? This was the question I kept
asking myself. Would I have to leave the hills and take a flat in Delhi? And what use would it be —
looking at you and speaking to you but never able to touch you? Not to be able to touch that which I
had already possessed would have been the subtlest form of torture.
The house was empty but I kept finding little things to remind me that you had been there — a
handkerchief, a bangle, a length of ribbon — and these remnants made me feel as though you had gone
forever. No sound at night, except the rats scurrying about on the rafters.
The rain had brought out the ferns, which were springing up from tree and rock. The murmur of the
stream had become an angry rumble. The honeysuckle creeper, winding over the front windows, was
thick with scented blossom. I wish it had flowered a little earlier, before you left. Then you could
have put the flowers in your hair.
At night I drank brandy, wrote listlessly, listened to the wind in the chimney, and read poetry in
bed. There was no one to tell stories to; and no hand to hold.
I kept remembering little things — the soft hair hiding your ears, the movement of your hands, the
cool touch of your feet, the tender look in your eyes and the sudden stab of mischief that sometimes
replaced it.
Mrs. Kapoor remarked on the softness of your expression. I was glad that someone had noticed it.
In my diary I wrote: ‘I have looked at Sushila so often and so much that perhaps I have over -looked
her most compelling qualities — her kindness (or is it just her easy-goingness?), her refusal to hurt
anyone’s feelings (or is it just her indifference to everything?), her wide tolerance (or is it just her
laziness?) … Oh, how absolutely ignorant I am of women!’
Well, there was a letter from Dinesh, and it held out a lifeline, one that I knew I must seize without
any hesitation. He said he might be joining an Art School in Delhi, and asked me if I would like to
return to Delhi and share a flat with him. I had always dreaded the possibility of leaving the hills and
living again in a city as depressing as Delhi; but love, I considered, ought to make any place habitable
…
And then I was in a bus, on the road to Delhi.
The first monsoon showers had freshened the fields, and everything looked much greener than
usual. The maize was just shooting up, and the mangoes were ripening fast. Near the larger villages,
camels and bullock-carts cluttered up the road, and the driver cursed, banging his fist on the horn.
Passing through small towns, the bus-driver had to contend with cycle-rickshaws, tonga-ponies,
trucks, pedestrians, and other buses. Coming down from the hills for the first time in over a year, I
found the noise, chaos, dust and dirt a little unsettling.
As my taxi drew up at the gate of Dinesh’s home, Sunil saw me and came running to open the car
door. Other children were soon swarming around me. Then I saw you standing near the front door.
You raised your hand to your forehead in a typical Muslim form of greeting: a gesture you had picked
up, I suppose, from a film.
For two days Dinesh and I went house-hunting, for I had decided to take a flat if it was at all
practicable. Either it was very hot, and we were sweating, or it was raining and we were drenched.
(It is difficult to find a flat in Delhi, even if one is in a position to pay an exorbitant rent, which I was
not. It is especially difficult for bachelors. No one trusts bachelors, especially if there are grown-up
daughters in the house. Is this because bachelors are wolves, or because girls are so easily seduced
these days?)
Finally, after several refusals, we were offered a flat in one of those new colonies that sprout like
mushrooms around the capital. The rent was two hundred rupees a month, and although I knew I
couldn’t really afford so much, I was so sick of refusals, and already so disheartened and depressed,
that I took the place, and made out a cheque to the landlord, an elderly gentleman with his daughters
all safely married in other parts of the country.
There was no furniture in the flat except for a couple of beds, but we decided we would fill the
place up gradually. Everyone at Dinesh’s home — brothers, sisters-in-law, aunts, nephews and nieces
— helped us to move in. Sunil and his younger brother were the first arrivals; later the other children
some ten of them, arrived and debouched all over the rooms. You, Sushila, came only in the afternoon,
but I had gone out for something and only saw you when I returned at tea-time. You were sitting on the
first-floor balcony, and smiled down at me as I walked up the road.
I think you were pleased with the flat; or at any rate, with my courage in taking one. I took you up to
the roof, and there, in a corner under the stairs, kissed you very quickly. It had to be quick, because
the other children were close on our heels. There wouldn’t be much opportunity for kissing you again.
The mountains were far, and in a place like Delhi, and with a family like yours, private moments
would be few and far between.
Hours later, when I sat alone on one of the beds, Sunil came to me, looking rather upset. He must
have had a quarrel with you.
‘I want to tell you something,’ he said.
‘Is anything wrong?’
To my amazement he burst into tears.
‘Now you must not love me any more,’ he said.
‘Why not?’
‘Because you are going to marry Sushila, and if you love me too much it will not be good for you.’
I could think of nothing to say. It was all too funny and all too sad.
But a little later he as in high spirits, having apparently forgotten the reasons for his earlier
dejection. His need for an affection stemmed perhaps from his father’s long and unnecessary absence
from the country.
Dinesh and I had no sleep during our first night in the new flat. We were near the main road, and
traffic roared past all night. I thought of the hills, so silent that the call of a nightjar startled one in the
stillness of the night.
I was out most of the next day, and when I got back in the evening it was to find that Dinesh had had
a rumpus with the landlord. Apparently the landlord had really wanted bachelors, and couldn’t
understand or appreciate a large number of children moving in and out of the house all day.
‘I thought landlords preferred having families,’ I said.
‘He wants to know how a bachelor came to have such a large family!’
‘Didn’t you tell him that the children were only temporary, and wouldn’t be living here?’
‘I did, but he doesn’t believe me.’
‘Well, anyway, we’re not going to stop the children from coming to see us,’ I said indignantly. (No
children, no Sushila!) ‘If he doesn’t see reason, he can have his flat back.’
‘Did he cash my cheque?’
‘No, he’s given it back.’
‘That means he really wants us out. To hell with his flat! It’s too noisy here anyway. Let’s go back
to your place.’
We packed our bedding, trunks and kitchen-utensils once more; hired a bullock-cart; and arrived at
Dinesh’s home (three miles distant) late at night, hungry and upset.
Everything seemed to be going wrong.
Living in the same house as you, but unable to have any real contact with you (except for the odd, rare
moment when we were left alone in the same room and were able to exchange a word or a glance)
was an exquisite form of self-inflicted torture: self-inflicted, because no one was forcing me to stay in
Delhi. Sometimes you had to avoid me, and I could not stand that. Only Dinesh (and of course Sunil
and some of the children) knew anything about the affair — adults are much slower than children at
sensing the truth — and it was still too soon to reveal the true state of affairs, and my own feelings, to
anyone else in the family. If I came out with a declaration that I was in love with you, it would
immediately become obvious that something had happened during your holiday in the hill-station. It
would be said that I had taken advantage of the situation (which I had), and that I had seduced you —
even though I was beginning to wonder if it was you who had seduced me! And if a marriage was
suddenly arranged, people would say: ‘It’s been arranged so quickly. And she’s so young. He must
have got her into trouble.’ Even though there were no signs of your having got into that sort of trouble.
And yet I could not help hoping that you would become my wife sooner that could be foreseen. I
wanted to look after you. I did not want others to be doing it for me. Was that very selfish? Or was it
a true state of being in love?
There were times — times when you kept at a distance and did not even look at me — when I grew
desperate. I knew you could not show your familiarity with me in front of others; and yet, knowing
this, I still tried to catch your eye, to sit near you, to touch you fleetingly. I could not hold myself back.
I became morose, I wallowed in self-pity. And self-pity, I realised, is a sign of failure; especially of
failure in love.
It was time to return to the hills.
Sushila, when I got up the morning to leave, you were still asleep and I did not wake you. I watched
you stretched out on your bed, your dark face tranquil and untouched by care, your black hair spread
over the white pillow, your long thin hands and feet in repose. You were so beautiful when you were
asleep.
And as I watched, I felt a tightening around my heart, a sudden panic that I might somehow lose
you.
The others were up, and there was no time to steal a kiss. A taxi was at the gate. A baby was
bawling. Your grandmother was giving me advice. The taxi driver kept blowing his horn.
Goodbye, Sushila!
We were in a middle of the rains. There was a constant drip and drizzle and drumming on the
corrugated tin roof. The walls were damp, and there was mildew on my books and even on the pickle
that Dinesh had made.
Everything was green, the foliage almost tropical, especially near the stream. Great stagferns grew
from the trunks of trees, fresh moss covered the rocks, and the maidenhair fern was at its loveliest.
The water was a torrent, rushing through the ravine, and taking with it bushes and small trees. I could
not remain out for long, for at any moment it might start raining. And there were also the leeches, who
lost no time in fastening themselves on to my legs and fattening themselves on my blood.
Once, standing on some rocks, I saw a slim brown snake swimming with the current. It looked
beautiful and lonely.
I dreamt a dream, a very disturbing dream, which troubled me for days.
In the dream, Sunil suggested that we go down to the stream.
We put some bread and butter into an airbag, along with a long bread-knife, and set off down the
hill. Sushila was barefooted, wearing the old cotton tunic which she had worn as a child. Sunil had on
a bright yellow T-shirt and black jeans. He looked very dashing. As we took the forest path down to
the stream, we saw two young men following us. One of them, a dark, slim youth, seemed familiar. I
said, ‘Isn’t that Sushila’s boy friend?’ But they denied it. The other youth wasn’t anyone I knew.
When we reached the stream, Sunil and I plunged into the pool, while Sushila sat on the rock just
above us. We had been bathing for a few minutes when the two young men came down the slope, and
began fondling Sushila. She did not resist; but Sunil climbed out of the pool and began scrambling up
the slope. One of the youths, the less familiar one, had a long knife in his hand. Sunil picked up a
stone and flung it at the youth, striking him on the shoulder. I rushed up and grabbed the hand that held
the knife. The youth kicked me on the shins and thrust me away, and I fell beneath him. The arm with
the knife was raised over me, but I still held the wrist. And then I saw Sushila behind him, her face
framed by a passing cloud. She had the bread-knife in her hand, and her arm swung up and down, and
the knife cut through my adversary’s neck as though it were passing through a ripe melon.
I scrambled to my feet, to find Sushila gazing at the headless corpse with the detachment and mild
curiosity of a child who has just removed the wings from a butterfly.
The other youth, who looked like Sushila’s boy friend, began running away. He was chased by the
three of us. When he slipped and fell, I found myelf beside him, the blade of the knife poised beneath
his left shoulder-blade. I couldn’t push the knife in. Then Sunil put his hand over mine, and the blade
slipped smoothly into the flesh.
At all times of the day and night I could hear the murmur of the stream at the bottom of the hill. Even if
I didn’t listen, the sound was there. I had grown used to it. But whenever I went away, I was
conscious of something missing, and I was lonely without the sound of running water.
I remained alone for two months, and then I had to see you again, Sushila. I could not bear the longdrawn-out uncertainty of the situation. I wanted to do something that would bring everything nearer to
a conclusion. Merely to stand by and wait was intolerable. Nor could I bear the secrecy to which
Dinesh had sworn me. Someone else would have to know about my intentions —someone would have
to help. I needed another ally, to sustain my hopes; only then would I find the waiting easier.
You had not been keeping well, and looked thin; but you were as cheerful, as serene as ever.
When I took you to the pictures with Sunil, you wore a sleeveless kameez made of purple silk. It
set off your dark beauty very well. Your face was soft and shy, and your smile hadn’t changed. I could
not keep my eyes off you.
Returning home in the taxi, I held your hand all the way.
Sunil (in Punjabi): ‘Will you give your children English or Hindi names?’
Me: ‘Hindustani names.’
Sunil (in Punjabi): ‘Ah, that is the right answer, uncle!’
And first I went to your mother.
She was a tiny woman and looked very delicate. But she’d had six children — a seventh was on
the way — and they had all come into the world without much difficulty and were the healthiest in the
entire joint family.
She was on her way to see relatives in another part of the city, and I accompanied her part of the
way. As she was pregnant, she was offered a seat in the crowded bus. I managed to squeeze in beside
her. She had always shown a liking for me and I did not find it difficult to come to the point.
‘At what age would you like Sushila to get married?’ I asked casually, with almost paternal
interest.
‘We’ll worry about that when the time comes. She has still to finish school. And if she keeps failing
her exams, she will never finish school.’
I took a deep breath and made the plunge.
‘When the time comes,’ I said. ‘When the time comes, I would like to marry her.’ And without
waiting to see what her reaction would be, I continued: ‘I know I must wait, a year or two, even
longer. But I am telling you this, so that it will be in your mind. You are her mother, and so I want you
to be the first to know.’ (Liar that I was! She was about the fifth to know. But what I really wanted to
say was, ‘Please don’t be looking for any other husband for her just yet.’)
She didn’t show much surprise. She was a placid woman. But she said, rather sadly, ‘It’s all right,
but I don’t have much say in the family. I do not have any money, you see. It depends on the others,
especially her grandmother.’
‘I’ll speak to them when the time comes. Don’t worry about that. And you don’t have to worry
about money or anything — what I mean is, I don’t believe in dowries — I mean, you don’t have to
give me a Godrej cupboard and a sofa-set and that sort of thing. All I want is Sushila …’
‘She is still very young.’
But she was pleased; pleased that her flesh and blood, her own daughter, could mean so much to a
man.
‘Don’t tell anyone else just now,’ I said.
‘I won’t tell anyone,’she said with a smile.
So now the secret — if it could be called that — was shared by at least five people.
The bus crawled on through the busy streets, and we sat in silence, surrounded by a press of people
but isolated in the intimacy of our conversation.
I warmed towards her — towards that simple, straightforward, uneducated woman (she had never
been to school, could not read or write), who might still have been young and pretty had her
circumstances been different. I asked her when the baby was due.
‘In two months,’she said. She laughed. Evidently she found it unusual and rather amusing for a
young man to ask her such a question.
‘I’m sure it will be a fine baby,’ I said. And I thought: That makes six brothers-in-law!
I did not think I would get a chance to speak to your uncle Ravi (Dinesh’s elder brother) before I left.
But on my last evening in Delhi, I found myself alone with him on the Karol bagh road. At first we
spoke of his own plans for marriage, and, to please him, I said the girl he’d chosen was both beautiful
and intelligent.
He warmed towards me.
Clearing my throat, I went on. ‘Ravi, you are five years younger than me, and you are about to get
married.’
‘Yes, and it’s time you thought of doing the same thing.’
‘Well, I’ve never thought seriously about it before — I’d always scorned the institution of marriage
— but now I’ve changed my mind. Do you know who I’d like to marry?’
To my surprise Ravi unhesitatingly took the name of Asha, a distant cousin I’d met only once. She
came from Ferozepur, and her hips were so large that from a distance she looked like an oversized
pear.
‘No, no,’ I said. ‘Asha is a lovely girl, but I wasn’t thinking of her. I would like to marry a girl like
Sushila. To be frank, Ravi, I would like to marry Sushila.’
There was a long silence, and I feared the worst. The noise of cars, scooters and buses seemed to
recede into the distance, and Ravi and I were alone together in a vacuum of silence.
So that the awkwardness would not last too long, I stumbled on with what I had to say. ‘I know
she’s young and that I will have to wait for some time.’ (Familiar words!) ‘But if you approve, and
the family approves, and Sushila approves, well then, there’s nothing I’d like better than to marry
her.’
Ravi pondered, scratched himself, and then, to my delight, said: ‘Why not? It’s a fine idea.’
The traffic sounds returned to the street, and I felt as though I could set fire to a bus or do something
equally in keeping with my high spirits.
‘It would bring you even closer to us,’said Ravi. ‘We would like to have you in our family. At
least I would like it.’
‘That makes all the difference,’ I said. ‘I will do my best for her, Ravi. I’ll do everything to make
her happy.’
‘She is very simple and unspoilt.’
‘I know. That’s why I care so much for her.’
‘I will do what I can to help you. She should finish school by the time she is seventeen. It does not
matter if you are older. Twelve years difference in age is not uncommon. So, don’t worry. Be patient,
and all will be arranged.’
And so I had three strong allies — Dinesh, Ravi, and your mother. Only your grandmother
remained, and I dared not approach her on my own. She was the most difficult hurdle, because she
was the head of the family and she was autocratic and often unpredictable. She was not on good terms
with your mother, and for that very reason I feared that she might oppose my proposal. I had no idea
how much she valued Ravi’s and Dinesh’s judgement. All I knew was that they bowed to all her
decisions.
How impossible it was for you to shed the burden of your relatives! Individually, you got on quite
well with all of them; but, because they could not live without bickering among themselves, you were
just a pawn in the great Joint Family Game.
You put my hand to your cheek and to your breasts. I kissed your closed eyes, and took your face in
my hands, and touched your lips with mine; a phantom kiss in the darkness of the verandah. And then,
intoxicated, I stumbled into the road and walked the streets all night.
I was sitting on the rocks above the oak forest when I saw a young man walking towards me down
the steep path. From his careful manner of walking, and light clothing, I could tell that he was a
stranger, one who was not used to the hills. He was about my height, slim, rather long in the face;
good-looking in a delicate sort of way. When he came nearer, I recognised him as the young man in
the photograph, the youth of my dream — your late admirer! I wasn’t too surprised to see him.
Somehow, I had always felt that we would meet one day.
I remembered his name and said, ‘How are you, Pramod?’
He became rather confused. His eyes were already clouded with doubt and unhappiness; but he did
not appear to be an aggressive person.
‘How did you know my name?’ he asked.
‘How did you know where to find me?’ I countered.
‘Your neighbours, the Kapoors, told me. I could not wait for you to return to the house; I have to go
down again tonight.’
‘Well then, would you like to walk home with me, or would you prefer to sit here and talk? I know
who you are, but I’ve no idea why you’ve come to see me.’
‘It’s all right here,’ he said, spreading his handkerchief on the grass before sitting down on it. ‘How
did you know my name?’
I stared at him for a few moments, and got the impression that he was a vulnerable person —
perhaps more vulnerable than myself. My only advantage was that I was older and therefore better
able to conceal my real feelings.
‘Sushila told me,’ I said.
‘Oh. I did not think you would know.’
I was a little puzzled, but said, ‘I knew about you, of course. And you must have known that, of
course, or you would hardly have come here to see me.’
‘You knew about Sushila and me?’ he asked, looking even more confused.
‘Well, I know that you are supposed to be in love with her.’
He smote himself on the forehead. ‘My God! do the others know, too?’
‘I don’t think so.’ I deliberately avoided mention of Sunil.
In his distraction he started plucking at tufts of grass ‘Did she tell you?’ he asked.
‘Yes.’
‘Girls can’t keep secrets. But in a way I’m glad she told you. Now I don’t have to explain
everything. You see, I came here for your help. I know you are not her real uncle, but you are very
close to her family. Last year in Delhi she often spoke about you. She said you were very kind.’
It then occurred to me that Pramod knew nothing about my relationship with you, other than that I
was supposed to be the most benevolent of ‘uncles.’ He knew that you had spent your summer
holidays with me — but so had Dinesh and Sunil. And now, aware that I was a close friend of the
family, he had come to make an ally of me — in much the same way that I had gone about making
allies!
‘Have you seen Sushila recently?’ I asked.
‘Yes. Two days ago, in Delhi. But I had only a few minutes alone with her. We could not talk much.
You see, Uncle — you will not mind if I also call you Uncle? I want to marry her, but there is no one
who can speak to her people on my behalf. My own parents are not living. If I go straight to her
family, most probably I will be thrown out of the house. So I want you to help me. I am not well off,
but I will soon have a job and then I can support her.’
‘Did you tell her all this?’
‘Yes.’
‘And what did she say?’
‘She told me to speak to you about it.’
Clever Sushila! Diabolical Sushila!
‘To me?’ I repeated.
‘Yes, she said it would be better than talking to her parents.’
I couldn’t help laughing. And a long-railed blue magpie, disturbed by my laughter, set up a shrill
creaking and chattering of its own.
‘Don’t laugh, I’m serious, Uncle,’said Pramod. He took me by the hand and looked at me
appealingly.
‘Well, it ought to be serious,’ I said. I was just thinking of how clever Sushila is — or how simple!
‘How old are you, Pramod?’
‘Twenty-three.’
‘Only seven years younger than me. So please don’t call me Uncle. It makes me feel prehistoric.
Use my first name, if you like. And when do you hope to marry Sushila?’
‘As soon as possible. I know she is still very young for me.’
‘Not at all,’ I said. ‘Young girls are marrying middle-aged men every day! And you’re still quite
young yourself. But she can’t get married as yet, Pramod, I know that for a certainty.’
‘That’s what I feared. She will have to finish school, I suppose.’
‘That’s right. But tell me something. It’s obvious that you are in love with her, and I don’t blame
you for it. Sushila is the kind of girl we all fall in love with! But do you know if she loves you? Did
she say she would like to marry you?’
‘She did not say — I do not know … There was a haunted, hurt look in his eyes, and my heart went
out to him. ‘But I love her — isn’t that enough?’
‘It could be enough — provided she didn’t love someone else.’
‘Does she, Uncle?’
‘To be frank, I don’t know.’
He brightened up at that. ‘She likes me,’ he said. ‘I know that much.’
‘Well, I like you too, but that doesn’t mean I’d marry you.’
He was despondent again. ‘I see what you mean … But what is love, how can I recognise it?’
And that was one question I couldn’t answer. How do we recognise it?
I persuaded Pramod to stay the night. The sun had gone down and he was shivering. I made a fire, the
first of the winter, using oak and thorn branches. Then I shared my brandy with him.
I did not feel any resentment against Pramod. Prior to meeting him, I had been jealous; and when I
first saw him coming along the path, I remembered my dream, and thought, ‘Perhaps I am going to kill
him, after all. Or perhaps he’s going to kill me.’ But it had turned out differently. If dreams have any
meaning at all, the meaning doesn’t come within our limited comprehension.
I had visualised Pramod as being rather crude, selfish and irresponsible, and unattractive college
student, the type who has never known or understood girls very well and looks on them as strange
exotic creatures who are to be seized and plundered at the first opportunity. Such men do exist; but
Pramod was not one of them. He did not know much about women; neither did I. He was gentle,
polite, unsure of himself I wondered if I should tell him about my own feelings for you.
After a while he began to talk about himself and about you. He told me how he fell in love with
you. At first he had been friendly with another girl, a classfellow of yours but a year or two older.
You had carried messages to him on the girl’s behalf. Then the girl had rejected him. He was terribly
depressed, and one evening he drank a lot of cheap liquor. Instead of falling dead, as he had been
hoping, he lost his way and met you near your home. He was in need for sympathy, and you gave him
that. You let him hold your hand. He told you how hopeless he felt, and you comforted him; and when
he said the world was a cruel place, you consented. You agreed with him: what more can a man
expect from a woman? Only fourteen at the time, you had no difficulty in comforting a man of twentytwo. No wonder he fell in love with you!
Afterwards you met occasionally on the road and spoke to each other. He visited the house once or
twice, on some pretext or another. And when you came to the hills, he wrote to you.
That was all he had to tell me. That was all there was to tell. You had touched his heart once; and
touching it, had no difficulty in capturing it.
Next morning I took Pramod down to the stream. I wanted to tell him everything, and somehow I
could not do it in the house.
He was charmed by the place. The water flowed gently, its music subdued, soft chamber music
after the monsoon orchestration. Cowbells tinkled on the hillside, and an eagle soared high above.
‘I did not think water could be so clear,’said Pramod. ‘It is not muddy like the streams and rivers
of the plains.’
‘In the summer you can bathe here,’ I said. ‘There is a pool further downstream.’
He nodded thoughtfully. ‘Did she come here too?’
‘Yes, Sushila and Sunil and I … We came here on two three occasions.’ My voice trailed off and I
glanced at Pramod standing at the edge of the water. He looked up at me and his eyes met mine.
‘There is something I want to tell you,’ I said.
He continued staring at me; and a shadow seemed to pass across his face — a shadow of doubt,
fear, death, eternity, was it one or all of these, or just a play of light and shade? But I remembered my
dream and stepped back from him. For a moment both of us looked at each other with distrust and,
uncertainty; then the fear passed. Whatever had happened between us, dream or reality, had happened
in some other existence. Now he took my hand and held it, held it tight, as though seeking assurance,
as though identifying himself with me.
‘Let us sit down,’ I said. ‘There is something I must tell you.’
We sat down on the grass, and when I looked up through the branches of the banj-oak, everything
seemed to have been tilted and held at an angle, and the sky shocked me with its blueness, and the
leaves were no longer green but purple in the shadows of the ravine. They were your colour, Sushila.
I remembered you wearing purple — dark smiling Sushila, thinking your own thoughts and refusing to
share them with anyone.
‘I love Sushila too,’ I said.
‘I know,’ he said naively. ‘That is why I came to you for help.’
‘No, you don’t know,’ I said. ‘When I say I love Sushila, I mean just that. I mean caring for her in
the same way that you care for her. I mean I want to marry her.’
‘You, Uncle?’
‘Yes. Does it shock you very much?’
‘No, no.’ He turned his face away and stared at the worn face of an old grey rock; and perhaps he
drew some strength from its permanency. ‘Why should you not love her? Perhaps, in my heart, I really
knew it, but did not want to know — did not want to believe. Perhaps that is why I really came here
— to find out. Something that Sunil said … But why didn’t you tell me before?’
‘Because you were telling me!’
‘Yes, I was too full of my own love to think that any other’s was possible. What do we do now? Do
we both wait, and then let her make her choice?’
‘If you wish.’
‘You have the advantage, Uncle. You have more to offer.’
‘Do you mean more security or more love? Some women place more value on the former.’
‘Not Sushila.’
‘Not Sushila.’
‘I mean you can offer her a more interesting life. You are a writer. Who knows, you may be famous
one day.’
‘You have your youth to offer, Pramod. I have only a few years of youth left to me — and two or
three of them will pass in waiting.’
‘Oh, no,’ he said. ‘You will always be young. If you have Sushila, you will always be young.’
Once again I heard the whistling-thrush; its song was a crescendo of sweet notes and variations that
rang clearly across the ravine. I could not see the bird; but its call emerged from the forest like some
dark sweet secret, and again it was saying, ‘It isn’t time that’s passing by, my friend. It is you and I.’
Listen. Sushila, the worst has happened. Ravi has written to say that a marriage will not be possible
— not now, not next year; never. Of course he makes a lot of excuses — that you must receive a
complete college education (‘higher studies’), that the differences in our ages is too great, that you
might change your mind after a year or two — but, reading between the lines, I can guess that the real
reason is your grandmother. She does not want it. Her word is law; and no one, least of all Ravi,
would dare oppose her.
But I do not mean to give in so easily. I will wait my chance. As long as I know that you are with
me, I will wait my chance.
I wonder what the old lady objects to in me. Is it simply that she is conservative and traditionbound? She has always shown a liking for me, and I don’t see why her liking should change because I
want to marry her grandniece. Your mother has no objection; perhaps that’s why your grandmother
objects.
Whatever the reason, I am coming down to Delhi to find out how things stand.
Of course the worst part is that Ravi has asked me — in the friendliest terms and in a most
roundabout manner — not to come to the house for some time. He says this will give the affair a
chance to cool off and die a natural (I would call it an unnatural) death. He assumes, of course, that I
will accept the old lady’s decision and simply forget all about you. Ravi has yet to fall in love.
Dinesh was in Lucknow. I could not visit the house. So I sat on a bench in the Talkatora Gardens and
watched a group of children playing gulli-danda; then recalled that Sunil’s school gave over at three
o’clock and that if I hurried I should be able to meet him outside St. Columbas’s gate.
I reached the school on time. Boys were streaming out of the compound, and as they were all
wearing green uniforms — a young forest on the move — I gave up all hope of spotting Sunil. But he
saw me first. He ran across the road, dodged a cyclist, evaded a bus, and seized me about the waist.
‘I’m so happy to see you, Uncle!’
‘As I am to see you, Sunil.’
‘You want to see Sushila?’
‘Yes, but you too. I can’t come to the house, Sunil. You probably know that. When do you have to
be home?’
‘About four o’clock. If I’m late, I’ll say the bus was too crowded and I couldn’t get in.’
‘That gives us an hour or two. Let’s go to the exhibition ground. Would you like that?’
‘All right, I haven’t seen the exhibition yet.’
We took a scooter-rickshaw to the exhibition grounds on Mathura Road. It was an industrial
exhibition, and there was little to interest either a schoolboy or a lovesick author. But a cafe was at
hand, overlooking an artificial lake, and we sat in the sun consuming hot dogs and cold coffee.
‘Sunil, will you help me?’ I asked.
‘Whatever you say, Uncle.’
‘I don’t suppose I can see Sushila this time. I don’t want to hang about near the house or her school
like a disreputable character. It’s all right lurking outside a boy’s school; but it wouldn’t do to be
hanging about the Kanyadevi Pathshala or wherever it is she’s studying. It’s possible the family will
change their minds about us later. Anyway, what matters now is Sushila’s attitude. Ask her this, Sunil.
Ask her if she wants me to wait until she is eighteen. She will be free then to do what she wants, even
to run away with me if necessary — that is, if she really wants to. I was ready to wait two years. I’m
prepared to wait three. But it will help if I know she’s waiting too. Will you ask her that, Sunil?’
‘Yes, I’ll ask her.’
‘Ask her tonight. Then tomorrow we’ll meet again outside your school.’
We met briefly next day. There wasn’t much time. Sunil had to be home early, and I had to catch the
night train out of Delhi. We stood in the generous shade of a peepul tree, and I asked, ‘What did she
say?’
‘She said to keep waiting.’
‘All right, I’ll wait.’
‘But when she is eighteen, what if she changes her mind? You know what girls are like.’
‘You’re a cynical chap, Sunil.’
‘What does that mean?’
‘It means you know too much about life. But tell me — what makes you think she might change her
mind?’
‘Her boy friend.’
‘Pramod? She doesn’t care for him, poor chap.’
‘Not Pramod. Another one.’
‘Another! You mean a new one?’
‘New,’said Sunil. ‘An officer in a bank. He’s got a car.’
‘Oh,’ I said despondently. ‘I can’t compete with a car.’
‘No,’said Sunil. ‘Never mind, Uncle. You still have me for your friend. Have you forgotten that?’
I had almost forgotten; but it was good to be reminded.
‘It is time to go,’ he said. ‘I must catch the bus today. When will you come to Delhi again?’
‘Next month. Next year. Who knows? But I’ll come. Look after yourself, my friend.’
He ran off and jumped on to the footboard of a moving bus. He waved to me until the bus went
round the bend in the road.
It was lonely under the peepul tree. It is said that only ghosts live in peepul trees. I do not blame
them: for peepul trees are cool and shady and full of loneliness.
I may stop loving you, Sushila; but I will never stop loving the days I loved you